People like this have been coming by and of course I
would never get much of a chance to talk to this
level of persons without this program. It's been
very interesting. How long have you been working
on this? Actually since 1974. It's got some very
good technology in it. In the process we think
we've discovered a brand new principle of heat
transfer for example. At least I've been teaching
heat transfer for many many many years. I'd never
heard about it nor has anyone else in our
department heard about it. There's some real
challenges of making a system like this that
really does work and meets the criteria that would
have to be met to make it practical in terms of
compact size, dependability, and that kind
of thing. We also have some other ideas we're
working on now that we expect, frankly, premature
but We expect them to be such that they will
absolutely mandate the use of alcohol for cars
simply because of the improvement that you
get. How long have you been working on the other
project that you've been doing? This solitaire
scheme? Oh, I can't remember when we first
conceived of it. Now, it was way back in the 60s.
Dick and I used to sit around and- Who was this other
person? Dr. Davis. Richard R. Davison, who's a
compadre here in the department. Davison,
without the D. And actually, we came up with the
concept and applied for a patent long before we got
active in the research area. So, that particular
patent is owned by us. Now, the other one, of
course, was on a car, was received here at the
university. No, it was such a novel idea, it sailed
right on through. How long did it take? That one
went through faster than we would have liked. It
turned out that because of the embargo, any patent
application that had anything to do with energy
was given favored treatment. And it went through
in about a year and a half. The reason we wish it had
taken another five or six years is because patents
only last fifteen years in this country.
Frankly, it's going to take at least 10 or 12 years
before this system even gets a good try. So that
doesn't leave you a lot of time on your patent. Had
they delayed for another four or five years as they
normally do in getting a patent, then it would just
now be, well, it would have come out, but it would be
worth at least four or five more years of life.
Well, then, do you devote equal time to teaching
and research? Well, everybody in our department I
guess everybody is working both research and
teaching. Our department is a little bit unique in
that everybody, according to the university
formula, teaches full time, which means all of
their research is in addition to that.
It's kind of a comfortable position to be in
because you're not subject to research monies as
to whether you're going to be able to be paid or not.
but it's a little bit uncomfortable in that it
works the very tail off of everybody in the
department.
What are some of the changes that you've seen in
electrical and chemical engineering since
you've been at A&M? Of course the most outstanding
change here at A&M has been the increase in
feminine students. Initially we had no students
here that were girls, and even chem engineering
departments in other schools only had usually one
every three or four years, who incidentally
always turned out to be the top students for some
reason. And now we have approximately one of,
somewhere between one of four or one of five of our
undergraduates is a girl. So this has been a very
distinctive change. How long has this change been
underway? Oh, it started with when Earl Rudder
took over.
First it started that just girls who were
daughters of the profs and so forth could attend
and then spread out until it's now here. The other
thing that's been amazing here is the rapid growth
of the department. In just the last few years,
we've increased approximately 400 or 500 percent
in enrollment. The big shock I have there is that
the quality of students I thought would drop. as
the enrollment increased, and actually it seems
that we're getting better qualified students now
than we used to get. Why do you suppose that is? I
think the high schools are doing a better job.
At least that would be my guess. Our SAT scores are
very, very high.
Why do you have so few blacks in engineering? Do you
have any ideas on that? As far as I know, there has
been no, absolutely no discrimination against
blacks in our department. I have noticed a great
deal on the campus as far as that is concerned. Our
student, American Institute of Chemical
Engineering Society president was black here a
few years ago. I don't think the students have any
discrimination. We have graduated over,
I don't know, a dozen or two dozen blacks.
I think our problem primarily is that we just
haven't been able to get them to either come or to
stay in our program. And I don't know exactly why
this is.
We have never given them any special favors. The
ones who were here were treated just like everyone
else and got grades that were, as far as I know,
totally non-discriminatory. Some of them are
very good, some of them work so good just like
anybody else. The fact that you have other
colleges that are all black probably
keeps us from enrolling as many as we might. I'm not
exactly sure. The only thing I am sure of is there
has been no discrimination and we have been
perfectly willing, and the fact is we've tried
rather hard to encourage colored people to come.
jet meetings in various schools down in Houston,
for example, and tried to talk up A&M. One thing,
there's a lot of competition for not too many
blacks that go to school or college, I guess. When
you spread it out everywhere, they just didn't
want to go around. Have the salary levels for
chemical engineers always been as good as they are
today? No, these things go in cycles. The cycle up
until the 60s was that the chem engineers got
pretty well stomped on. During the 60s up to about
1970 or so, salaries took a very dramatic zoom.
Actually I think for a while even matched or
surpassed industrial salaries. Since then
there's been a steady deterioration in salary
ranking and right now I don't believe I would enter
the teaching of chem engineering if I were a young
man. I don't see why these young people are staying
with us to be honest about it. Because they can
make, all of them can make at least ten to fifteen
thousand a year more in industry with
considerable less effort.
This is a big problem and one that instead of
anybody really seeming to address, it seems to be
getting progressively worse and worse. The
salaries look good until you look at industry. The
reason they look good is simply because in the
inflationary era, all of us tend to think back in
the days of yore when I came here, for example, for
$6,000 in 53. But as far as I am concerned, my
standard of living has not changed very much. fact
is, if I still had kids in school and so forth, I
suspect my standard of living has been steady
since I first came here. I don't believe I have
improved it at all, even though I've moved up to a
full professorship. What type of job
opportunities do master's degree holders of
electrical engineering, I mean chemical
engineering? Master's? They usually don't get
starting salaries that are the very pronounced
above what the B.S. level gets. Oh, the B.S. level
now will get around 27,000 and the Masters will get
around 30. Maybe, well, yeah about that. Maybe 28
and a half to 30. The difference though is a Masters
student is better prepared. There hasn't yet been
a experience system that has been as efficient as a
structured educational program. And we, I think I
can look around and see the people who went out as
masters after a few years have improved their
relative standings considerably, simply
because they were more competent. Now, PhDs, I
just don't know. It's sort of a labor of love to
become a PhD.
My only thought on that is everybody ought to get
educated as much as he can. If he's got the brain
power and it was given to him, it's not his fault. He
somehow has an obligation to develop it to
whatever maximum he can.
How do you think the chemical engineering program
at A&M compares with those at other universities?
Oh, I think we compare very well with others. I'm
not exactly sure whether it's our department. I'm
more inclined to think it's the kind of students
that we just somehow seem to attract. I firmly
believe Aggies are a different kind of people than
go to the usual university type. I've had many
recruiters tell us that if they were only going to
recruit at one school, A&M would be the first
school they would go to. And I don't think they were
just trying to flatter me. I believe they were
serious about it. I worry a great deal. I think
we have probably much too much emphasis on, every
administrator will deny it, but it's a fact of
absolute certainty, publish or perish. And I
think our educational program is very greatly
harmed. I think it's harmed because we haven't,
for example, hired anyone with industrial
experience of any magnitude for years. And I
believe in order to teach, at least undergraduate
engineering, your profs should have a rather
extensive industrial background.
Actually, if someone were to come in here now with
an industrial background, I believe it would be
negative as far as his career is concerned,
although it would be extremely positive as far as
his students are concerned. Because I think he
would get no credit at all for this type of thing.
There's a lot of pressure placed on back then to
publish articles. Not so much to publish articles
as to bring in money. bring in a big research grant
with a lot of overhead and that sort of thing. But to
publish articles, I wouldn't say. If you've got
much research going at all, it's easy to get enough
papers out to satisfy any reasonable criteria. So
the big thing is to get an ongoing program that
brings in a lot of quote dollars I kind of resent the
idea of measuring research in terms of dollars in
the first place, because most of your best
research probably is dollar-wise pretty skimpy.
Are most of these funds, you're talking about
government or private interest funds? Almost all
of it is federal. Are these funds, among those that
are being cut back with the regular
administration money cuts? In our area yet,
particularly. I think the Reagan administration
is cutting back more in social sciences and
these kind of programs where they hire some guy to
sit around a Peruvian brothel that I was reading
about in the paper the other day for a year and make
little notes of the comings and goings of all the
inhabitants. That kind of thing, I think, is
taking a pretty sharp licking right now. Of
course, as far as I'm concerned, it should. basic
research and this kind of thing, the kind of thing
we're doing at the moment hasn't suffered too
badly. And I kind of hope to get rid of the
Department of Energy because I think their
programs have been principally negative rather
than positive. It'll be supplanted, I hope, with
something that would be more useful. Why do you
think that his program's been negative? Well,
let's look at it this way. Every year, the
Department of Energy has spent more money than the
top income of the top four or five oil companies.
And I don't know of a single thing they've done
that's worthwhile yet as far as solving the energy
crisis. I think they've inhibited it. If they'd
just left that money with the oil companies or
somebody else, it would have been better than
nothing.
What about state legislative funding for
research? Do you have much of that? We have been
funded with the CAR primarily from this area, not
heavily. $5,000 a year, $7,000 a year, and that
kind of thing. Most of that work has been, I guess
you'd say, a labor of love. We just enjoy it and
spend most of my weekends and things like that on
it. I've got a lot more respect for the Texas
legislature than I do for the national
legislature.
I'm sure that without the two major research
projects that you have underway that you wouldn't
have too much time for any other type of research.
Is that correct?
You don't have much time for any extensive
research. We have a grant from DOE in conjunction
with the mechanical engineering department to
study dissociated alcohol into hydrogen and CO2,
for example, as a automotive fuel. This is
$125,000, something like that.
So we do, we are carrying out other programs. Just
that particular one is not particularly exciting
because the fact is we think it's kind of stupid. We
take a good fuel like alcohol at great expense and
In practicality, convert it to hydrogen and CO2,
which is a questionable value as a fuel. We don't
see much point in it, but we were able to get money in
that area. We could get money to do what we're
doing, so we do it. You didn't receive your PhD
until you were over 50. Did you have any regret
about having waited so long? Well, financially,
it hurt me a great deal. because I didn't get all
those big salary raises that were coming along in
the 60s because at that time they had to kind of, you
know, they always have limits. You can't get above
that limit until you've gotten all the criteria
met. One of the criteria was to have an advanced
degree, a Ph.D. So I have never been able to catch
up. I will always be financially back over what I
would have had if I had gone ahead and just got my
Ph.D. I first got started on all this,
but at the time it just wasn't practical because it
looked like it was too much of a sacrifice at any one
time with kids in school and everything. It's just
hard to quit your job and do this kind of thing. You
finished the coursework in a year. That's
correct. Because I only had a sabbatical year to
leave. I had to.
Do you have any other thing we need to touch on
before we close? I guess everybody has a pet idea. I
believe that this university has gotten so big, so
bureaucratic, that it's almost ready to collapse
at its own weight. For example, we have a new
engineering research building just going up
across here. If you look at the blueprints, you'll
find that approximately half of that building
will be occupied by offices, and only half of it
will be research. The rest of it will be used by
these, quote, tax eaters that we have around. I
think the best thing that could happen with this
university, if it were all practical, would be to
have a, I'm not even sure how you pronounce the
word, an ombudsman, I guess it is, could report
directly to the president and carry to him
suggestions from the lower level of the working
level I guess you'd say of the university and
preserve anonymity in the process. There's so
many things around here where you fill out four or
five forms to do something And all the time you're
doing it, you know that the only person that's ever
going to look at one of them will be some little old
girl somewhere in some office who will chunk it off
in a certain spot. And it's just make work. There's
too much of it. Much too much of it. I used to teach a,
I started a stack sampling short course here to
teach people how to sample smoke stacks for
pollutants. I did this at the urging of the Texas
Air Control Board because they wanted to
establish standards And measuring these things
is rather difficult, and there were only about
five or six people in the state that knew how. So we
started this course, which was very, very
successful. As a matter of fact, we had
international recognition. I was invited to
Spain twice to give the course. I went to Portugal
and helped them set up their stack sampling
program. We've had students from all over the
world to the course. It was a very profitable
venture, made several hundred, well, up to a
hundred and some thousand dollars. But I just got
harassed so much by, they formed a new thing on here
called the Center for Continuing Education. And
they had such a harassment, I just quit. I had to
submit budgets, and I had to do all kinds of things.
And they didn't do me a bit of good. They were just a
stone around my neck, so to heck with it. And so that
course has gone by the way. Used to offer it every
year, but it stopped now. What was the name of that
again? Stack Sampling Short Course.
You see the thing is that apparently they need to
report to the president on how effective a job
they're doing and in order to do it they've got to
know how many people attend the course and how many
dollars I took in and blah blah blah blah blah and
then they take a turn around and write to the
president say look at the good job we're doing and
all they're doing is just causing me problems so I
give up. This continuing education division is a
as a bureaucratic watchdog, so to speak, over
various departments. Is that what you're saying?
Yeah. I think there are a lot of good things they
could do, but they haven't done any, as far as I can
tell. They never helped me any. All they did was
give me a headache. Were they mandated by the
legislature? No, they were part of the university
program. They decided we ought to have a
continuing thing. And I think one of the problems
was that there were certain divisions or
something that were given... I guess you'd say
giving academic credit in this kind of thing,
which was not coordinated through the
university. I can see a need for that kind of a
thing. There's a lot of good things they could do.
They just don't seem to respond. For example, my
biggest problem has been in mailing lists. I could
have used a lot of assistance in developing good
mailing lists and getting mailings out. The
Association of Former Students, for example, has
a system where they mail it, stuff the envelopes,
and do the whole bit. And we have to sit around here
and fold them by hand and all that. But that kind of
practical thing is beyond the Center for
Continuing Education.
Do you have any regrets about ever coming to work
here at Asia?
Oh, I had a few when I first came because I took about
a 50% or 100%, well, 50% cut in salary to come here. I
had a good job at Apache, but after a few years I
began to realize it didn't make much difference
whether my kids drove around in Cadillacs or
secondhand Fords. Probably they're better off
with a secondhand Ford anyhow. I guess you'd say I
got lazy or something. My motives changed. I guess
that's a better sense. The way it turns out, I think
I have been one of the most lucky of people. For
example, Oh, just a few weeks ago, on a Monday
morning I was getting out of bed and I got one foot
down on the floor and it all of a sudden hit me that I
could hardly wait to get to work. And I got to
thinking, I'll bet you there aren't more than 1% of
the population on Monday morning are so excited
and anxious to get to work that they hardly don't
want to stop to eat. And if you're in that category,
you've got to be awfully lucky. I enjoy what I'm
doing. And I guess the main reason that more than
any other one thing, other than the fact that I've
been able to do a lot of research in areas that I
like, is I just like Aggies. I like my students.
They're wonderful people. They're fun to be
around. They're stimulating. I don't believe any
other school quite would fit that mold. Maybe I'm
just prejudiced, but I think we have a special
breed here that's unusual.
I appreciate you taking the time to talk. There was
a lot of yakking.